[WHOOSH]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> There are certain people
throughout history who have
just had this certain something.
They seem more alive
or have had an ability
to shape reality around them.
And I wanted to see what was it
that made some people not just
special, but somehow,
totally break
the mold of what people think
is possible for human life.
And for that reason, I
started studying the occult.
>> A witch stirring her
cauldron for a wicked spell.
A magician practicing
black magic.
A psychic holding a seance.
What do these images
all have in common?
They are all stereotypes
that many people
think of upon hearing
the word occult.
>> Witches were shrouded
in myth, fears, suspicion.
>> But despite their bad
reputations for being
associated with the dark arts,
are occultist practices really
evil?
>> Rituals really are tools.
They could be used for
good or bad purposes.
>> And if they're
not inherently evil,
how did these practices get to
be associated with such social
disgrace and disapproval
in the first place?
And what then, is the
true goal of occult magic?
[THEME MUSIC]
The word occult originates
from the Latin word occulere,
meaning conceal.
The dictionary defines
the word occult
as involving or relating
to supernatural, mystical,
or magical powers or phenomena.
Historically, many of
these occult practices
have been hidden or practiced
in the shadows of society.
>> Well, occult
just means hidden.
And anything that people
feel is hidden from them,
it's like when the lights
are off and the room is dark,
you assume something
is there that's not.
It could be scary.
>> Many occult practices
involve the use of magic.
The word magic, as
defined by Wikipedia,
is the application of
beliefs, rituals, or actions.
Practiced with the view that
they can subdue or manipulate
natural or supernatural
beings or forces.
>> To me, that's what magic is
or spell-working or anything.
Something that causes a shift in
the natural trajectory in life.
Nature, everything kind of goes
in the easiest pattern, to me.
Almost flows downhill
like gravity.
Our life, if we
don't put this to it,
just is going to
take the easy path.
Magic is going.
I'm going to shift that.
Whether it's my
perception or myself
around the world within me.
>> Due to these beliefs
in the supernatural,
the term occultism has taken on
a rather negative connotation.
As these practices tend
to oppose the prevailing
worldview, which is
rooted in science.
Practices considered
to be occult
include divination, alchemy,
astrology, psychic readings,
performing magic, and
even some religions,
such as Wicca,
voodoo, and paganism.
Many of these practices
are having a resurgence
in modern society,
including the ancient Norse
art of rune casting and song.
Runic scholar
Kaedrich Olsen teaches
how to practice these sacred
incantations for manifestation,
transformation, and healing.
>> The old form of the
Norse magic is called Galdr,
and it means, basically,
singing the runes.
If they were to sing--
[VOCALIZING]
That brings that healing
energy into the person
that they're
directing it towards.
The way I like to think
of it is that they
are the subtle connections
between the subtle layers
of our consciousness and the
subtle layers of existence.
And you don't need the
actual shape or the sound
or the name to tap into that.
>> Some of the most prominent
figures of the occult world
helped to define and
spread these practices.
Perhaps, the most well-known
person in all things occult
is Aleister Crowley.
An English magician who lived
in the early 20th century.
He was a member of the
secret society, The Hermetic
Order of the Golden Dawn.
He founded the
religion of Thelema.
And wrote several
books, including
"The Book of the Law."
He is credited with adding a K
to the end of the word magic.
In order to differentiate
between those
doing stage tricks and those
who are performing true magic.
Crowley is known
for practicing what
he called sex
magic, experimenting
with drugs and altered
states of reality,
and for sensationalizing
his practices in order
to manipulate the
media and gain fame.
>> Aleister Crowley was
an extraordinary figure.
He was a great artist.
I think, in many ways,
he was a great intellect.
In many ways, he was a truly
great explorer into the occult.
But he didn't provide the
ethical guardrails in his life,
in his works, or in the
lives of his students
that would help them not
get sucked into a, kind of,
magical narcissism.
It's a recipe for
great personal danger.
And danger to other
people around you.
>> While Crowley might have
practiced both white and black
magic, most experts suggest
that this is in the minority
and that the majority of
practitioners use only positive
intentions in their practices.
In fact, many disciplines,
including magic and witchcraft,
have moral codes that are
not to be crossed if you
are practicing white magic.
>> White magic is magic that
is undertaken for one's own
personal evolution.
It's, for instance,
yoga, meditation,
the spiritual
quest, understanding
spiritual technique.
>> Something for
humanity, basically.
>> Yes.
And ultimately,
something for humanity.
It's the vertically raising
oneself to be all that you can.
My definition of
black magic would just
be things done purely for
personal or material gain,
without any spiritual focus.
People who dabble in
the dark side of magic
will get their fingers burnt.
Until you get your
fingers burnt,
you don't fully
understand how important
it is to be rigorous
with following the rules.
>> There's actually three laws--
very important.
Do what you want, but
don't hurt anyone.
Do what you want, but don't
interfere with another person's
free will.
And as you send out,
so return three-fold.
>> A cause and effect,
action and reaction.
What you put out
comes back to you.
That's why I wouldn't do
curses or dark spells.
Because if you live in a
world, I'm going to curse you,
then you live in a world
where curses exist.
If you give and your
generous with your time,
with your money, with your love,
that's what comes back to you.
>> If you do something from
a place of insecurity, fear,
and thinking I can't have
it, unless I manipulate,
then you're not ever really
going to have that intrinsic
power that allows you to
experience a really full
and happy and abundant life.
>> If most occult practices keep
to these moral codes and most
practitioners are
practicing white magic,
why is it that many of these
disciplines have been demonized
by society?
>> The idea of paganism being
that it was pre-Christian,
when the Christian
faith established itself
as a dominant religious mindset,
then what came before it had
to be evil and debased.
And so that sort of threw
paganism into that bracket.
And then we have the pagan
god, Lord of the Forest, Pan.
It's a horned God.
He's got horns.
And half his body's an animal.
And it's more
metaphorical than literal,
but that image of Satan
came from that image
of the horned god.
>> The witch stereotype is the
witch of popular imagination.
Normally, a woman who is
part of this large conspiracy
with other witches
to worship the devil.
Renounce Christianity.
That person did not exist.
What did exist were shamans
and wise women and seers.
>> Usually, the negative
stereotypes of witchcraft are
based in ignorance and
a lack of information.
So I think the information
age has actually
been really, really healthy
for the international magical
community.
>> If authentic magic isn't
inherently bad or evil,
then what is the true
purpose of studying it?
>> The act of living a magical
life is a perpetual act
of transformation and of
evolution-- personal evolution.
>> Adopting magic, or
any other spiritual path,
turns you into the best
version of yourself.
It allows you to find
your purpose in life.
And that's what people love
more than anything right now.
They have all this stuff
and then all this media.
But they don't know who
they are and they don't
know what their life is for.
And magic unveils that for you.
Once you have that,
then you're going along
with the current
of the universe.
And the doors just open for you.
>> If one is drawn
to the magical art,
does one need to already possess
magical abilities in order
to join a practice?
>> I think we're
all born with it.
And it's just-- it's
like going to the gym
and learning to work out.
To just allow that
intuition to come through.
There's exercises you can do.
There's meditations you can do.
It's really just about
shutting down your left brain.
You have to get reason
and logic out of the way
and allow that world where
that right brain side,
where anything can happen.
>> We have a tendency to
want to say that's the magic.
The magic is the runes.
The magic is the cards.
The magic is the "I Ching."
We are the magic.
>> Absolutely.
>> I believe that
everybody has divine gifts.
It's do you want
to use them or not?
Anybody can do this,
if they want it.
>> It's really easy
to change your life.
It doesn't take money.
It doesn't take a lot of time.
If you've got something
you feel like it's a curse,
grab a lemon.
Grab some salt. Do this thing.
And guess what?
It goes away.
>> Despite hundreds of years
of perpetual dismissal as evil
or quackery, occult
practices have persisted
on in the shadows of society.
With the majority having
altruistic and benevolent
intentions.
Today, with the internet
and social media,
these ancient magical practices
are becoming less hidden
and therefore, the stigma and
fear of them is improving.
However, many
practitioners of magic
encourage others to
approach the magical life
as a serious modern
spiritual path
in order to really
benefit from all
it has to offer in one's own
life and one's relationship
to the world and
universe at large.